things that I recall that were important to him and
things that he considered important. I made a
speech to the Sol Ross group in March of 91, and I'm
looking at my notes now, and I had under his
accomplishments in the mid-60s coeducation,
integration, the name change, the
non-compulsory core, and my comment here was he
felt he had to sacrifice some of his own
deep-rooted feelings to do what was best for the
school. And then I told a little story about LBJ and
what his remarks were. I had notes here that
Beaumont Aggies threatened to burn all their
diplomas. I think one or two actually did. There
were a few rings and diplomas mailed back. Then I
had state and federal support look at his
connections, LBJ and the White House, John
Connolly. I had land office to A&M, then Tiger
Teague and Bill Moore as far as financing. And I
wrote with these connections, A&M had support
like no other school in America. In the 60s, we were
put on the map of higher education. He was very
proud of beginning the faculty buildup, the first
National Academy of Sciences faculty member. At
the time that the Students for a Democratic
Society were disrupting the campus in Colorado
and at Berkeley, he had Bob Melcher say, Melcher,
oh, some bitch is going to send somebody down here
to stir us up. And I want you to tell me exactly who
the first one is. And it turns out it was a little
redheaded boy. And Melcher said, here's your SDS
leader. And he said, I want him in my office
tomorrow morning. And the little boy was very
nervous. I saw him. And after a discussion which
went something like this, son, I know who you are. I
know why you're here. And I want you to know that
what you're hoping to do here is not going to work.
And this fat old man here that's president of this
school is going to be the first one after you with a
club if you start any kind of disruption. And then
later, word got out that some SDS colleagues from
Austin were going to come over and disrupt final
review. And Mr. Rutter saw to it that a story got
out. It did not come from the president's office.
But it got to the SDS, the little handful that we
had. to the effect that at final review, there
would be some unmarked vans parked around the
drill field. And the school had nothing to do with
it. This is just a rumor that they would be filled
with Aggie football players with baseball bats
just aching to find someone to disrupt final
review. And then no disruption took place. The
enrollment explosion began, and I did some little
figures here that might be interesting. In the
decade of the 50s, the total enrollment was up 546
students. Decade of the 60s, it went up to 7,095
students. In the decade of the 70s, it went up
19,183 students. And I had a little note that I
signed while I was dean of admissions, 15 years.
90,121 diplomas, which was 58.8% of those awarded
since 1878. So that was just an example of the
growth. Then on his habits, thoughts, and
feelings, rudder now. Motto for Aggies, the
difficult we do immediately, the impossible
takes just a bit longer. I mentioned the smooth
operations with the board. deep and abiding faith
in former students, closeness unparalleled. And
I remember that one day Mr. Zachary was in his
office, and things were kind of tough at the time,
and I remember Mr. Zachary stood and said, Earl,
there'll be times when you're present here that
you're going to need something badly. He said,
when you want something very badly, whatever it
is, then you call me. As far as you know, did he ever
do that?
Probably on political support for funding, yes.
Probably so. Used him for political . Are you aware
of any major
frustrations he had with the board where maybe he
and the board did not end up agreeing? No. I've
never heard of any. If they had them, they worked
them out. Things were going really so well, and he
and the board got along so well. They're real, as I
remember, and I was over there at that building,
you'd hear little comments from Wells or whoever.
The comments would be things like, Earl, what can
we do for you at this meeting? It was for you. you the
universal. Now, describe his process, his
political process, for Austin or Washington. How
did he go about getting things done there? Well, he
had the most marvelous set of contacts you could
possibly imagine, starting at the top and going
down through the governor and the state senators
and what have you. I think to start with, he would
call them up and tell them what he had in mind and
say, is this going to fly? And if it's not, you tell
me what I have to do to make it fly. And he would do it
directly, not through an intermediary. Usually
not. He knew them as well as. Oh, yeah. Did we have
anybody officially then representing us? In
Austin, you mean, or Washington? I can't think of
it. No, no, no, it was one on one as best I can
remember. The, uh, one other little thing on my
notes here about rudder that I told those boys that
would be a good story for you to have is I was in his
office one day and I may have told you this before
and Abner McCall called him and he just did like
this meant to stay there in my chair and they
finished their business on the phone. And
finally, we were playing Baylor at College
Station that week, and this was like Thursday. And
he said, Abner, what are those damned old mean
bears of yours going to do to our poor little old
Aggie Saturday? And he paused, and he nearly fell
out. I've never seen him laugh that hard. But Abner
McCall, he told me, said, Earl? We're going to beat
the hell out of you, but we're going to do it in a
Christian-like way.
Your basic question, what was he proudest of?
Construction of the facilities that we needed. He
got that started. He began the program for getting
the first few stellar type of faculty. always with
the hope that we could have really good ones that
kept at the classroom level. He kept harping at
that. And the funding in Austin and otherwise, and
including former students. He was a marvel with
former students. He would go to their, and not many
presidents have done this since then, he would go
to their Annual meetings, the executive
committees, and he would sit there and talk to them
just like we're talking right now. And I don't
think anyone has really done that that
effectively since then. He paid attention to them
and made them feel very good, and in turn, he could
call them. You name Beaumont, you name Port
Arthur, you name a town, he had somebody
influential there that he could call because he
made himself one of them. And one of the things that
he looked to me for, and Williams did it even more
than, than Rutter. He wanted me at those meetings,
especially when he couldn't be there. He wanted
someone from his office there that had his ear. To
represent.
Yeah. Now, uh, during the early sixties, uh, I
understood that at first, uh, particularly that
year when Marion Pugh was running for the Senate
against Bill Moore, that supposedly President
Rutter and Moore supposedly were not completely
in agreement. That's right. But they worked out.
Do you know how that? They kind of clashed on this,
that, and the other. But they got along well enough
that Moore could say, Earl, I'm going to vote this
way on a given subject, and here's why. And you're
just going to have to. Bear with me on that. I know
you don't like it, but I've got to vote. And, but,
but they would talk and say, well, we disagree on
this, but here's what we're going to do now. Here's
a, where does that thing? I was just going, yeah,
here's a, was an interesting meeting right here.
That's Evans rudder. And this is when they
legislature decided they were going to get
involved. and whether or not A&M was
coeducational. And I am telling you the truth.
What is it? That's my birthday. Oh, it is? That was a
tough time because they allowed people up in the
bleacher seat, what do you call it, balcony, get up
and make impassioned talks and this, that, and the
other. But the,
let me get this straight, a very pretty lady set up a
desk in the hallway leading to the Senate chamber.
And she knew how every one of the senators, what
position they were going to take on coeducation.
And this lady represented a group opposed to it.
And as a senator would come up, she would call him
over and suggest that if he needed entertainment
that night, that if he would vote the right way,
that she could sure damn sure arrange that. That
was a standing joke. And she was opposed to
coeducation. Now, do you remember? She was with a
mother's club. Was there a vote? Did they vote? I
think they took. A non-binding? Yeah, a
non-binding kind of vote. And that's what this
terrible night was there, because it just went
back and forth. It was just terrible. When it
turned out, what was that non-binding vote? Do you
remember? No, I don't remember. No,
I better not say. I don't remember. But it was such a
wishy-washy thing, so mixed up, that it didn't
amount to a hill of beans. And they knew they didn't
have the rightful authority to make that
decision. Now, I have heard that during that
period, just by sheer coincidence, that on
certain nights at about 10 o'clock at night, two
cars would pull up beside each other facing
opposite directions with the driver's side
windows almost touching in the parking lot just on
the north side of the campus theater. And with
their lights off, these two total strangers would
chat with each other that one of them happened to be
a state senator and the other one happened to be a
university president have you ever heard that no i
heard that that that bill moore and mr rutter
sometimes would chat their person to person face
to face no i did not if that happened i don't know
about it uh let's see was there any important
person that mr rudder listened to uh who was a
pronounced opponent of those changes? Any of his
close friends, advisors?
I've never heard of one. And there was no board
member who became well known for his opposition.
Once a word came back from LBJ, the way that it did, I
think people just said, well, what the hell?
Mrs. Rudder's role during those years, describe
her as the wife and mother.
Whenever I'm around her and there's someone new
between us there, she will tell them. Edwin here
was the first person at A&M that paid any attention
to the president's wife. And on his first
function, which was some kind of a little coffee or
something, he came over to me and said,
everybody's paying attention to the president
over there. Is anyone paying any attention to you?
And she never forgot that. We had a close
relationship, the four of us. We went out to their
ranch a couple, three times, dove hunting, the
four of us, when he just needed to get away. She was
frustrated at him because he did not want to look
bad on paper in terms of what it cost to operate that
president's home. He tried valiantly and
succeeded to a large extent to get most of it given.
I think that president's home cost the state of
Texas $63,000. And he took great pride in that. She
had to operate on a just threadbare basis and the
board never did appropriate enough money to
operate that thing and yet they they expected to be
wind and dying there when they when the spirit
moved them and it's it was tough on williams as well
as rudder now the they were living when you became
the system they were living in the old president's
house they were the one that burned burned and my
best story about that is when Tiger T, in
particular, came to see them. He had to have a
bottle of whiskey. That's just the way it is. So Mr.
Rudder had a Pan Am flight bag with a couple of
bottles of bourbon in it that he hid way back in his
closet. And he was desperately afraid that the
students or faculty would find out that the
president had whiskey in his house. And so he hid it
in that Pan Am bag in the night. that Joe and Peggy
Hollingsworth were married across the street in
the all-face chapel. We were there. And that
night, later, that place burned. Yes, ma'am? Are
you? OK. You going where? I'm going to a mess. A
mess? Reunion group. OK. All right. See you later.
Be right back. The fire started between the
chimney and the frame. And the rudders got back
from wherever they were while she was really
boiling up in flame and in spite of warnings from
the fire people, he roared into that house and
retrieved that Pan Am bag and got out of there. I
think he had actually burned hair in his effort to
prevent the scandal of whiskey being found on that
campus. He's later i think the board said now look
earl when they built the new house uh you've got to
entertain so just forget about this phobia about
whiskey because when we come over we want it too and
so he he he finally set up a little bar there but he
sure was careful about who saw it now in the old
house did they lose a lot of their furniture and
possessions they sure did The students went in and
saved a lot of things. One was a piano that I
remember. But they really lost a lot of personal
things. They really did. And it was a hardship on
them. It really was. Now, where did they live after
the fire? On Lee Street. In a two-story White House
in the first block of Lee Street on the left-hand
side as you go south. And the school just rented
that for them until they built the other one. He
went to great lengths to get as much of the new and
built free of charge as he could, and donations
from alumni. And he did a tremendous job on that. He
wanted it facing east. He did that. And John, I
mean, Connolly. What's his from? Connolly Moving
and Storage. Donald and Doug. Moved him from Lee
Street to his home at no cost. That was his gift. And
then a few months later, Peg and I finished our
little home down Pershing Street. And Conley
Brothers moved us, and I said, OK, what's the bill?
And he said, the same thing that Mr. Rutter got. Oh,
how nice. How nice. And in those days, $10 was a, I
mean, we had kids out at the kazoo. And that was
really a generous kind of a thing.
Those are really the things to me that he was
proudest of, the beginning of a new faculty, the
higher caliber faculty, the financial support
required to really move the school, the
connections to get big time people like Werner Von
Braun and the first astronauts here. He took great
pride in those kind of things, associating the
students with what was great, who was great in
America at that particular time.
There have got to be some memories tucked away in
your brain of some of the lighter moments and some
of the more serious moments of the Rudder years.
The funniest thing that ever happened was that
daughter Jane, I believe it was Jane, fell in love
with a real good-looking old boy that was as poor as
a church mouse, but handsome, who was a student in
veterinary medicine. And in order to survive, he
had to get a job. He didn't have a car, so it had to be a
job on campus. and he ended up with the grounds
maintenance crew. Do you know this story? And the
grounds maintenance crew had a chalkboard, and
they'd say, okay, on Thursday, we're going to be
trimming the hedges around the Coke building. On
Tuesday, we're going to be at the library doing
this or that. Well, he looked on there and said,
Thursday, you're going to be working in the
president's rose garden. And he was going with
Jane and Mr. Rudder, was out of town. And he called
Jane and he said, sweetie, I'm going to be working
in your Rose Garden Thursday. Where is your daddy
going to be? And she looked it up and said, he's
going to be out of town. He said, let me have lunch
with you there at the house. You fix lunch for us.
And she readily agreed. And they came over in an old
dump truck. And I can still see the foreman wore one
of those old Texaco hats and khakis buttoned up
here. the 12 o'clock whistle blew. And he said,
come on, boys. We're going back for lunch. And this
boy threw his hoe down. He says, I think I'll just
have lunch here and walked into the front door. The
poor old man. The former didn't know whether to shh
or go blind. He didn't know what to do. And the boy
just walked in. Another thing that was funny that
happened, it sure wasn't funny at the time, with
his phobia about whiskey on campus. And we had a
deal where I could go to Austin. When I was in
Austin, he said, go by the Liquor Association. And
they have a building in Austin. And they had a
standing offer that I could come over there or
someone from Rutter's office and pick up case
after case of booze and to bring it back for
official purposes. And so I did that several
times. He would not allow it to be kept at his house,
so I kept it in a closet at my house. And one time, we
got down to one bottle. It was time for another trip
to Austin. Had one good bottle left, and his rule
with me was always keep one good bottle. When he
called me, he'd meet me, and I'd give him this
bottle, and he would go over to Ramada Inn and give
it to Olin E.T., of which they would sit down and
drink the entire thing. So he calls me one Sunday
afternoon. He said, Edwin, get the bottle ready.
I'll be over there in about half an hour. Tiger's
here. And I had had a party of my own at the house. And
we had consumed most of that bottle, knowing full
well it'd be replaced before he'd need it. So here
was the president of the university coming over to
get his congressman his bottle of whiskey. And I
was out. So I ran over to Carl Butler's house by car.
I said, Carl, give me the best bottle of bourbon
you've got. I'll pay you back later. And boy, he saw
the urgency, gave it to me. And as I drove back onto
Texas Avenue, College Avenue, Mr. Rutter and his
wife passed by, going straight for my house. So I
came up right behind them. And I came out with a
brown bag. And I said, I'm embarrassed about the
kind of whiskey that we had for the Congressman. So
I prevailed on one of my friends to give us this
really top dollar, Paul. Well, how very nice. And I
never did tell him the difference. Let me add an
anecdote that I heard in Washington, and I cannot
remember from what member of the Texas delegation
it was. It was in the 60s, and I was up there doing
research on Jefferson Davis, and I went by two or
three different Texas congressmen's offices.
Oh, it was Jack Brooks. And I told him how helpful
the Library of Congress had been and so forth. He
knew my A&M connection and that I knew Mr. Rutter
and so forth. And he said that, one, he had
witnessed part of, and it's heard the rest of it,
that Mr. Rutter was in Washington and that Teague
was going to, because he was a committee chairman,
he had a big office, and he was going to cook some
steaks for certain members of the Texas
delegation. And he had also laid in some alcoholic
refreshment. Mr. Rutter was there. And while
they're cooking and waiting for the others to
come, they have a few refreshments. And they look,
and where are all the people? It's late. It's late.
And according to Brooks, when he went to his office
earlier than usual the next morning, here was the
chairman of the House Veterans Affairs
Committee. and the president of Texas A&M coming
down the hallway with their arms around each other
singing, goodbye to Texas, because they had
gotten mixed up on the night. It was the wrong
night. And so they said they weren't about to
cancel the party. They didn't cancel the party.
Probably the most emotional
thing that ever happened to me was the day that
President Kennedy was killed in Dallas, and I was
his assistant. And every administrator in the
Koch building was either in Dallas or somewhere.
And the lowly assistant to the president was the
highest-ranking officer in that office that day,
and I don't think that had ever happened before.
There's always at least a vice president, or they
weren't there. They were all because of
Kennedy's. So the word flashed that he'd been
shot. And Mr. Rutter was at that Coliseum waiting
to be there. And of course, the word came. And I ran
over to the MSC. There was no television in that
building at that time. And watched what was on the
air and started crying. Went back to the Koch
building, and the first thing I got was a call from
one
of the deans.
And he
was crying, just openly crying on the phone. He
said, I called to find out what we're supposed to
do. I said, I'll tell you what we're going to do. I'm
the only one here. And that places me in authority.
I said, we're going to close this damn thing down.
And I said, I will call all the other deans and the
chief vice presidents all across campus. And I
said, you just consider this school closed as of
right now. And that's what we did. And probably it
was the best thing to do. And we, if I'm not
mistaken, we canceled Bonfire. Bonfire, right.
And almost beat the Longhorns. Yeah. a national
championship year. Let's see. His relationship
with Mr. Teague. Describe that. Classmates. It
went way back all the way.
Mr. Teague
had a job shoveling manure out at the cattle and
livestock, I'll just say livestock barns,
as a way to make money. And Rudder was a transfer
student from Tarleton, but somehow they
immediately became friends, classmates, I mean,
roommates, I guess. And Rudder got permission
to stake out a cow somewhere close to where the
tennis courts are and sold the milk,
I think, to the athletic dorm or something like
that. But they had a great camaraderie going about
which one had the most. Teague claimed that Rudder
watered down the milk, and Rudder said, would
always come back with, well, you were out there
shoveling shit. How would you know what I was doing
with the milk? But they were nearly like teenage
boys growing up together. And of course, they had
the war experience. And Teague was made
postmaster. Do you remember that? And I remember
one day I was with him, and he was combing his hair.
And of all things, a little piece of shrapnel had
come through the skin. He got a blast up above him.
And he had shrapnel under the surface. And he said,
that's one of my damn problems. Every time I comb my
hair, a piece of steel comes out my comb. This while
he was a congressman? Yeah.
But they couldn't have been closer. And they were
always together.
Mr. Teague never had any problems politically as
far as I know, you know, getting reelected. That
just wasn't a problem at all. Judson E. Leupold was
his campaign manager always, and people used to
say, Tiger, old Lou, he's just kind of a joke. Why
don't you let him do all this stuff for you? He said,
would you go out to be nice, Texas, and take
students out there and nail up posters for me.
Would you do that? He does. He does it. And when I
need money, Lupo gets it for me. So it was a school
experience reinforced by military experience,
though they weren't together. And then the
relationship between a person in Austin and then
College Station and a man in Washington. It just
couldn't have been closer. Tiger would argue with
him. I think they had Tiger's biggest problem ever
with his constituency. Guess what? It was a
proposed dam on the Navasota River. And part of
that, I have learned since then, was complicated
by a man named Colter Hoppus, who was the
originator of Camp Creek Lake, and this was going
to be a country club for the good citizens of Bryan.
And that didn't quite pan out, but right at the end
of this road, south entrance road, is the Coulter
Office Ranch, which is approximately one-fourth
of a mile.